---
layout: post
title: Celebrating trans rights activists during Pride
blog_author: Southern New Hampshire DSA
permalink: statements/trans-rights-activists-in-history/
tags: lgbtq activism activist queer rights pride
short_description:
  This month, some of the membership highlight the history of  pivotal trans rights
  activists and the work they accomplished.
---

<h2 id="judith-butler">Judith Butler</h2>
Born in 1956, Judith Butler (They/Them) is a feminist philosopher and ardent civil
rights activist. Their body of work is vast and has come to form the bedrock of
modern queer theory. We owe a whole lot to Judith, from their groundbreaking work in
describing gender as a performance, as can be seen in one of their earliest works,
(Performative Acts and Gender Constitution, (1988)) to their latest bestselling work,
Who’s Afraid of Gender (2024) which dives into the roots of the anti-gender movement.
There is value in knowing exactly who the enemy is, but Judith Butler takes it a step
further by asking the question, “why?” Who’s Afraid of Gender? is said to be their
most accessible book; we heartily recommend you give it a read, I’ll let you in on
the gist of it: You see, Butler has noticed a pattern, and I’m sure you have too,
that anti-transgender rights, anti-abortion rights, and general anti-feminist
rhetoric follow right wing, authoritarian movements around, making things miserable
for everyone.

This is not an accident. Butler argues that this rising tide of bigotry presents an
opportunity for politicians, corporations, and sadly, many people like you and me are
a lightning rod for the feeling that we all share: that something is not quite right
with the world. This can be any number of things: insecurity, precarity, even climate
anxiety. They all lead to one thing and that is fear. Fear is perhaps one of
mankind’s most powerful motivators, says Butler, and one that they will do anything
to escape. This makes the people benefiting from those not-quite-right-things
naturally afraid themselves and leaves them with little choice but to point the
finger at anything else. And so, in the tradition of fascists of all stripes
throughout history, they have pointed their fingers at a ghost that they have
conjured for themselves of “gender ideology”. I don’t know about you, but I feel like
a person, not an ideology, and I deserve rights! Judith Butler would agree.

Butler is not only a philosopher, but a driven rhetorical speaker on civil rights of
all sorts. Butler continues to be outspoken in their support of economic justice; as
seen when they attended the Occupy Wall Street protest in 2011, voicing strongly
their support for Black Lives Matter, racial equality, and for the dignity of all
oppressed people. They have made powerful remarks in support of the people of Gaza
and they condemn the use of antisemitism as a shield for acts of genocidal fascism
around the world. If Judith Butler sounds like someone you’d like to hear more from
you can see them speak online, or pick up one of their books at your local library.
You won’t be disappointed!

<h2 id="leslie-feinberg">Leslie Feinberg</h2>
Groundbreaking lesbian author, leading transgender rights advocate, fighter for
workers’ rights, all these things are encapsulated in the person of Leslie Feinberg.
Born in 1949, Leslie first found her way into the world of activism through the
Workers World Party when she was in her twenties. As a member of the party, she took
part in protests against the treatment of the Palestinian people, the handling of the
AIDS epidemic, and even mobilized against the KKK, struggles that still resonate with
activists of today. In the 1970s her activism turned to writing. Feinberg was a long
time writer and eventually editor for the Worker’s World, the party newspaper for the
WWP. In its pages, she wrote and later edited the political prisoner pages, a segment
that with the opening of Guantanamo Bay to immigrants and other such politically
minded incarcerations, is sadly still in use. From journalism she moved into novel
writing and non-fiction, penning Stone Butch Blues (1993), a fictionalized
autobiography of her experiences as a queer member of the working class. The book has
won several awards, most notably what is now called the Stonewall Book Award for LGBT
fiction.

But Leslie is not just a world class news and fiction writer. She is also a pioneer
in transgender identity theory. In her work of non-fiction, Transgender Warriors
(1996), Leslie posited that the term transgender is less of a strict category and
more of an umbrella for those that present counter to or in challenge of traditional
concepts of gender and sexuality. This definition would extend the concept of
transgender identity to several gender non-conforming groups throughout history, from
modern butch lesbians, as Leslie identified, to the practices of European pagans and
some Native American tribes, to even figures such as Joan of Arc. In Transgender
Warriors, Leslie applied for the first time the lens of historical and material
analysis to the representation and also the repression of gender non-conforming
people. Through this expansion, Leslie drew the connection of the development of
transphobia to the parallel development of classism, patriarchy, and homophobia. All
methods of control. All ways to assist in the concentration of power and wealth in
the hands of a few. In later sections of the book, Feinberg highlights the often
centered position of Trans rights activists in many of history’s civil rights
struggles from Weimar Germany to the Stonewall Riots in the US.

Leslie Feinberg was also outspoken on the matter of support for the people of
Palestine, famously saying in 2007 “I am with Palestinian liberation with every
breath in my body; every muscle and sinew.” As a Jewish author, she stated that as
far as she was concerned, the question of the occupation of Palestine “went to the
heart of what it means to live and authentic life in a period in which this really
historical crime is taking place in their name.”

Sadly, Feinberg died in 2008, ill with a case of tick-borne Lyme disease that had
gone untreated since the 70s due to the difficulty being seen and cared for by a
doctor when you are gender non-conforming. In the last years of her life, Leslie ran
a blog focused upon the experience of being disabled and how it intersected with
class, as well as centering disability art.

<h2 id="magnus-hirshfield">Magnus Hirshfield</h2>
With his birth in 1868, Magnus Hirshfeld is one of the earliest advocates of gay and
transgender rights in recorded history. A doctor in Germany both during and after the
First World War, Hirschfeld was the founder of the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee,
the world’s first LGBTQ rights campaign, and the World League for Sexual Reform,
which sought to break the societal stranglehold around the subject of sex. In 1919,
he also opened the doors to the Institute for Sexual Science, the first of its kind.
At the Institute, Magnus pioneered the field of Sexology, the study of human sexual
attraction, behaviors, and function. It was here that even as the grip of the Nazi
party tightened around Germany, Hirschfeld bravely performed groundbreaking
procedures in the field of gender-affirming surgery. In fact, it was Magnus that
first coined the term “transsexual” in an essay in 1923, putting a name to what had
previously only been referred to as “extreme crossdressing”. Over the years, the
Institute would develop procedures for hormone therapy, vaginoplasty, facial
feminization and masculinization, and even a primitive form of hair removal
treatments. Hirschfeld was also a pioneer in the study of the inborn nature of
homosexuality and of Intersexuality. Truly a man ahead of his time!

Unfortunately for a gay German man living in the 1930s, Magnus drew the ire of
Hitler’s Nazi Party. Much like the fascists of today, the Nazis were obsessed with
trans people, seeing them as a threat to the toxically masculine culture they had
invented for their Germany. They considered the nascent acceptance of gay and trans
folks as an outgrowth of what they called “Judeo-Bolshevism,” a name that should
sound familiar if you’ve heard a right-winger speak any time in the last decade.
Don’t let them fool you, when they say things like cultural Marxism, you’ll now know
what they truly mean. The Nazi’s also loved to remove books from libraries out of
fear for the children. In fact, that famous image of the book burnings of the early
thirties is the very same library built by Hirschfeld for the Institute of Sexual
Science. After the raids that led to these bonfire rallies, the Institute was
declared “un-German” and shut down. While Magnus managed to escape to France, where
he died in 1935, many of the staff and clients of his Institute did not. It is
sobering to remember that many of our gay, lesbian, transgender, and intersex
brothers and sisters were also a victim of the concentration camps alongside those
society had considered unfit, infirm, foreign, and dangerous. But there have always
been those who fought, those who resisted, and even those who carried both the day
and the banner of liberation into the future, passing the torch of human rights from
one generation onto the next until we all can be free. It is our job to be the next
link in this long chain passing back into history, so that everyone, queer or no, may
one day live lives of open and happy authenticity.

<h2 id="lou-sullivan">Lou Sullivan</h2>
Born in 1951 in Milwaukee, Lou Sullivan was a trans author, activist, and diarist.
Having kept a diary from the age of ten, Lou would document his life starting from
his rebellious Catholic school “girl” days, to becoming one of the most noted trans
and gay activists in San Francisco. In one of his earlier entries in the sixties, he
notes “I want to look like what I am but don’t know what someone like me looks like.
I mean, when people look at me I want them to think—there’s one of those people (…)
that has their own interpretation of happiness. That’s what I am.” It would come to
light that his desire was to live as a man.

By 1973, Lou was living as a “Female Transvestite” while working as a secretary for
the Slavic Languages Department at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. It was
there when he broke into activism by joining the Gay People’s Union, which was hosted
by the university. By 1975, he fully realized that he was a transgender man and
sought a life in San Francisco: one of the few places in the country at the time that
had “more understanding” and proper access to hormones for his transition.

Unfortunately, he would hit a major roadblock: despite receiving lots of support from
his friends, family, and cis male boyfriend, Lou was frequently denied gender
affirming care and surgeries due to him identifying as a trans gay man. This forced
him into a three year period of regressing to live as a cisgender female and trying
to mask his trans identity. It wasn’t until he met transgender teacher and writer
Steve Dain, in 1979, that he received the encouragement and doctors and therapists he
needed from the Institute for Advanced Study of Human Sexuality.

Lou would channel his hardships and transitioning experience into the booklet
“Information for the Female-to-Male Crossdresser and Transexual”. This book was most
notable for being the first piece of trans research to distinguish the difference
between sexual orientation and gender identity. Though written specifically for the
transmasculine community, it quickly caught on in mainstream queer-centric spaces.
Though trans gay men have, of course, existed earlier, Lou became the most notable
example to bring attention to how it was not a contradiction.

Throughout his life, he led grassroots movements in making trans healthcare more
accessible. He lobbied for medical professionals to remove sexual orientation from
the criteria of Gender Identity Disorder. He fought for counseling, endocrinological
services, and reconstructive surgeries to be more available outside of gender
dysphoria clinics. Lou would also go on to establish FTM International: one of the
first orgs to specifically advocate for the rights and welfare of trans men.

Lou died of AIDs in 1991. It is with his contributions, that we as trans individuals
have easier access to the care we need as well as the beautiful sexuality-diverse
community we’ve come to be known for. We really were lucky to have him in our lives
and we encourage all to give him his long deserved flowers.

<h2 id="cece-mcdonald">CeCe Mcdonald</h2>
Born in May of 1989, CeCe Mcdonald is a black trans woman, convicted killer, LGBTQ
activist and prison abolitionist. In June of 2011, in Minneapolis, she was involved
in a racist and transphobic-driven altercation with Dean Schmitz. The incident
occurred while CeCe and her friends were on their way to buy late night groceries
when Schmitz stepped out with his girlfriend and ex for a cigarette. While CeCe
initially tried to ignore the verbal abuse thrown at her and her friends—which
involved a slew of terms such as ‘f\*ggots\*’, ‘n\*\*\*er lovers and
‘tr\*nny’—Schmitz instigated a fight between him and CeCe. After a brief but violent
struggle, the fight ended with CeCe having a scratch across her face that needed 11
stitches and Dean Schmitz with a pair of scissors in his chest, stabbed by McDonald.
He died in the ambulance on the way to the hospital.

After turning herself in, a decision she regretted, CeCe was charged with two counts
of second-degree murder. Her arrest and impending trial quickly caught media
attention, including from author Kate Bornstein, who compared how CeCe’s arrest
differed from George Zimmerman’s killing of Trayvon Martin; particularly how the
media focus was shifted away from self-defense in her case.

After accepting a plea bargain in May 2012, CeCe was sentenced to 41 months in prison
the following month. She was imprisoned in the Minnesota Correctional Facility - St.
Cloud as a man, despite identifying as female. Though initially denied HRT in prison,
it was only after a petition and mass campaigning that she was finally granted her
proper hormone treatment in prison. She was released in January of 2014.

During her imprisonment, national attention was brought to the treatment of black
trans women and the treatment of transgender prisoners, sparking the hashtag
#FreeCeCe. American trans actress Laverne Cox noted that Mcdonald served as the
inspiration for her performance as her iconic character of Sophia Burset in Netflix’s
“Orange is the New Black.” A documentary that detailed her imprisonment titled “Free
CeCe” was released at the San Francisco Transgender Film Festival in 2016.

She was profiled by Mother Jones, Ebony.com, and Rolling Stone in 2014 and heralded
as an “LGBT folk hero for her story of survival and for the price she paid for
fighting back.” That same year, CeCe was the recipient of the Bayard Rustin Civil
Rights Award by the Harvey Milk LGBT Democratic Club. She has since gone on to work
as an artist, serve as an activist-in-residence at the Barnard Center for Research on
Women, and publicly shared her letters from prison, calling for a political
revolution against the U.S.’ prison industrial complex.

For too long, CeCe has been overlooked and it’s time we give her the recognition she
deserves!

<h2 id="star">Sylvia Rivera, Marsha P. Johnson, and the Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries (STAR)</h2>
In the aftermath of the Stonewall Riots, the gay rights movement kicked into high
gear. Two young trans women of color took advantage of the momentum to build and
strengthen the underclass community of New York City.

Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson, both people of color and both living as drag
queens in Manhattan, saw first-hand the conditions minority groups lived under and
sought to change that. In September 1970, they formed an organization called Street
Transvestite Action Revolutionaries, or STAR. It should be noted that the word
‘transvestite’ was considered an acceptable term for transgender people at the time.

The organization was devoted to feeding and housing the queer and homeless
communities in Manhattan as well as fighting for gay and trans rights. Their
manifesto outlines their socialist vision for an end to oppression, outlining how
that oppression is baked into society’s sexist values and how that discrimination
manifests itself in various forms, from harassment and violence to denial of jobs and
basic services.

Many of the struggles the queer community faced in 1970 are still applicable today,
and their manifesto’s goals still ring true, calling for bodily autonomy, an end to
job discrimination and police crackdowns, malpractice from the medical industry, and
a call to action for free education, healthcare, clothing, food, transportation, and
housing.

Notably, the manifesto ends with a powerful statement:

“We want a revolutionary people's government, where transvestites, street people,
women, homosexuals, Blacks, Puerto Ricans, Indians, and all oppressed people are
free, and not fucked over by this government who treat us like the scum of the earth
and kills us off like flies, one by one, and throws us into jail to rot. This
government who spends millions of dollars to go to the Moon, and lets the poor
Americans starve to death. Power to the people.”

STAR’s manifesto, while using some dated language, is still as relevant as ever, with
the queer community and workers across the country and world still facing immense
struggles. To achieve these goals, the queer community and its allies must work with
like-minded organizations, putting the people first, just as STAR had done, fighting
to provide access to basic and essential rights for all oppressed peoples.
